Okay. I remember at the end of the last interview, you told us in pretty much
detail what the voyage from yesteryear was about. Did I? Yeah, we have material
on that already. I think you were just finishing it up. Okay. First of all, I
noticed in Locust that you received a Prometheus award for the voyage from
yesteryear. And I wondered what that award was. Is this me? I wondered what that
award consisted of, what it was given for. it's given by the libertarian party
every year for the fictional novel which they believe best depicts the ideals
and values that their party stands for that's about all I know right I think
they're pretty much strongly for individual freedom and the individual
responsibility that goes with it and the minimum government intervention in
business and in the life of the private individual that's consistent with
a secure and insanely functioning society In other words, the award is not just
for a science fiction novel, yours just happened to be one. I believe so. Yeah,
okay. Okay, is this word pronounced Qironians or Qironians?
I pronounce it Qironians, but I couldn't really say Qironians is wrong.
Different people have different customs. Sometimes, I remember when we did Latin
at school, the pronunciation of certain Latin verbs depended on which school he
went to. I think it's pretty much the same with this. I pronounce it Chironians.
Okay, my question would be, to the Chironians, they desired physical contact
with Earthmen, I guess seemingly to connect with their roots. And I wondered, do
you think it's possible, therefore, to construct a machine-ray society off
Earth? Will our genes allow it? I don't see why not. The fact that I had them
behaving that way, it's not necessarily a prophecy or a prediction or a
statement of anything that's inevitable. It was just a trait that made them more
interesting as thinking-feeling beings and gave an underlying motivation for a
lot of their actions. So it was purely arbitrary to help but to tie the plot
together. it wasn't a prediction based on anything i know that's true of us okay
this is a picky question i'm not even sure this would go in the final interview
but i was i was concerned in the uh it was fairly early in the book when the uh
the two the tyronians and the earthmen are there they're blending they're
getting together and uh there was a bar scene where the killing occurred okay
okay and the tyronian woman was being molested she pulled out a pistol and shot
the guy on the leg then there was an altercation and one of the earthmen was
killed it seemed a little strange to me given their society that they were
carrying guns right well and i realize they have that huge weapon and they're
pretty they're well able to take care of themselves but i wouldn't have thought
that they would need those guns against each other were they carrying them just
specifically because earthmen were around i think that was explained it said it
was a habit that It went back several generations, but they carried them against
each other. There was some talks in another part of the book.
Their personalities as individuals, they are the result of the same dealing out
and mixing of human gene sets as the rest of us. They're not in any way a super
race. They don't all have an IQ. They aren't all ethically and morally superior
and rational in their behavior. In other words, I wasn't really trying to depict
a utopia. I don't really like stories about utopia. I think they're hideously
boring places to read about. And yeah, because of the accident, well, not really
the accident, because of the circumstances circumstances surrounding their
origins and the isolation of their society from the way many of the problems of
our society are passed on through the ages. It so happened that many of the
things that we would regard as problems had been solved or at least ceased to be
problems, but I wasn't trying to suggest it was some utopia. and everybody
always acted rational and everybody always acted compassionately and
sympathetically and did the good thing. And I think that's kind of a cop-out,
right, is sometimes trying to depict these advanced societies and you say, well,
how do you solve the problem about the drunk next to you in the bar who insists
on starting a fight or somebody who's trying to... You know, people who insist
on being obnoxious and bothering other people and they get around having to
solve the problem by never having people act that way. well that's unrealistic
people are going to act that way and in their society they just defended
themselves against such eventualities because there was no traditional law or
authority to tell them they shouldn't and i guess by the time the earth people
showed up it was you know being accustomed that it's like wearing a hat or a
pair of boots that have been handed down although i think your point is probably
a very good one it could be that with with the of people around in their ways,
quite a number of people who's left their gut at home for the last few years and
just used it as a souvenir might take it out or worry it and carry it around
again just in case. I think that's very likely spot people while I didn't
specifically say so in the book. Okay, that's good. Okay, let me skip to the
Code of the Life Maker. Okay. Of course, there you return or you continue with
one of the themes that I think you pursue in much of your fiction, intelligent
machines or so forth. I guess, Now, this is almost a rhetorical question, so I
don't think I know the answer to it, but one of your contentions in the novel is
that machines or manufactured artifacts can have life which is just as valid as
human life, right? Sure. Okay, now, we normally think of machines as free from
human prejudices and emotional weaknesses and so forth. Yet you give the
talloids normal human shortcomings in religion and mysticism and so forth. I
wondered why you did that. I would- I don't think the fact that those traits
exist in us, I would suggest, isn't a consequence of our intelligence being
supported by carbon chemistry hardware. it's a consequence of our intelligence
and our human characteristics including our aggressiveness, our jealousies and a
lot of the things that can cause problems in the relatively secure environment
of a civilized culture having originated in a competitive survival-based
evolutionary environment it was the way in which we evolved
as beings that determined those traits it had nothing to do with the hardware
that our mental processes happen to be supported by in the case of the taloids
they, because of the beginnings that they come from which were described in the
prologue They had evolved competitively in a survival-oriented fashion in
exactly the same way as we had. I think my suggestion, and I think it's quite a
fairly valid one, is that they would have evolved similar traits and strengths
and weaknesses, belief systems, exactly the way we did because they had evolved
them to serve exactly the same purposes. the fact that their faculties were
supported on electronic hardware and ours was supported on carbon chemistry
hardware, to my mind, is completely immaterial. In other words, I guess that
actually giving them those kinds of human traits is sort of reinforcing the
notion that there doesn't have to be any essential difference between carbon
-based and machine life. Exactly. I mean, the faculty that we call thinking is a
very complex function of the nervous system that's evolved over millions of
years, but I suggest it's an emergent property of the level of complexity and
the way in which that complexity is organized at the highest level of the human
brain. It's nothing to do with the fact that down at the bottom level of the
hardware we happen to be talking about mechanical neurons instead of mechanical
electronic chips,
yeah, your point is right. It doesn't make a lot of difference. To try and
demystify the whole topic, I would reverse the normal way the question is asked
and say, as is
demonstrably obvious, if a system exists that's capable of supporting all of the
operations we normally refer to in everyday speech when we use the word
thinking. And that system happens to have come from naturally evolved origins.
Is there any reason to suppose that a system of comparable complexity in
organization that happens to have come from some other origins shouldn't be
capable of doing likewise? My answer is there's no reason to suppose that that's
true. Another part of it, of course, was kind of a little writer's license, in
that here we have these machines and their culture. Obviously, they were very
human-like in some of their emotions and some of the ways they had evolved. That
was quite deliberate, of course, to enable the reader to relate more closely to
them. If we made them totally alien and maybe building totally different
representations of world models and self-images, it could be very clever. but
you'd lose most readers completely. They'd just say, well, it was describing
some alien set of concepts. I couldn't understand it. So I kind of deliberately
bet that way a little because it is fiction after all, and the object is to
entertain human beings whether or not it's about machines. Okay, one of the
things I appreciated about the novel, I enjoyed it and I agree with it, was to
me it had a pretty sharp satiric edge to it. As a small example, little touches.
One of the talloids, I think his name was Gruerk, he enters a city on a steam
donkey preaching words of faith from the life maker. I wondered if you were just
having fun with something like that or are you seriously tearing something down?
Obviously having fun.
Some of these are rhetorical. I think I know the answers. Why Zambendorf is one
of the protagonists? he's a con man who operates with alleged mystical powers
and so forth something that you must personally detest.
What's the question? Well, why do you make him one of the protagonists? You
know, that we see much of what's happening through his eyes. I didn't. When I
started to write this book the original protagonist was Joey Massey the
psychologist and the conjurer. Okay? And Jerry Massey was originally supposed to
be the protagonist, and I had 20 chapters of the book written, and it wasn't
working, so I tore them all up and started all over again. The reason it wasn't
working, what happens when you start to write a novel? One of the signs that
it's going right, sometimes I go to science fiction conventions and I sit on
panels, and the panels are very frequently on scientific subjects and the kinds
of things that are speculated about in science fiction. But also, sorry,
I just tried to swat a fly that's bothering me. Some of them are on writing
itself, you know, being a writer and how to sell you stuff and things like that.
I'm less comfortable on those panels because I'm not sure of the value of all
this advice that professionals throw out and would-be writers, you know,
reverently absorb and note down. I think a lot of it is luck.
But so many of these things are just gut feel. One of the arts of writing a
book, I guess, is knowing where to draw the line of where do you stop fiddling
around with it and mail it off to the editor. nothing in nature is linear and
one of the most universal non-linear functions is the law of diminishing returns
and as you put more and more effort into a book the increment, the extra
improvement that you buy for your time gets less and less and you can fiddle
around trying to get something perfect and starve to death in the meantime at
the other end you can take far too little care and mail off a half-baked set of
ideas that don't stand to hope in hell of getting sold by, at least not to any
decent publisher. But somewhere between the two, there's this optimum level, and
all I can say is gut feel. I don't know of any list of conditions you can check
off and say, you know, check the boxes, and then it's ready to send. And when it
comes to characters, one of the feel, things that the gut feels that you get
when you know the book is going right is when the characters kind of come to
life in your mind and start to take over the story and they start to do things
their way. And it means that they are acquiring real personalities themselves
and they're doing the things you know they would do. And you say, how do you
know so-and-so would do that? Well, I just know him. And it's like the person
you've sat next to in the office for the last three years. Somebody cracks a
joke and you say, hey, Harry would love that. You know Harry, you know the way
he thinks. And it got to about 20 chapters and the characters were just, Massey
was just not working. He was not doing anything. He was wandering around as a
passive observer and listener. He was watching what other people were doing and
listening to what other people were saying. So he was just a roving observer
acting on behalf of the reader. And it's just not satisfying. It didn't feel
right. And one of the... When you've decided on a setting for a story to write
about, how do you decide who's going to be the protagonist anyway? One good
principle to follow is that... to ask who is most affected by the outcome of the
story or who most drives the story. whose actions are most responsible for the
story coming out the way it is. And if somebody clearly stands out in that role,
that's a good candidate for the protagonist. And after 20 chapters, it was
pretty obvious it wasn't massive. And yet it just seemed to be Zabendorf. And I
suppose interesting stories to write about are periods in an individual's life
where the person is changed. Their outlook on life has changed, their values
have changed. They come out of the story visibly different in ways from when
they went in. Well, that's probably an interesting period in their life to write
about, and they're the obvious protagonist for that particular story, and that's
the way it worked out in this case. And whether I happen to have a lot of time
for ESP and so-called paranormal phenomena is beside the point. um and you know
why in any case why should that um disqualify the character from being my
protagonist if i happen not to agree with him i mean plenty of people like old
frederick foresight in the day of the jackal and a lot of books we could name it
uh their their hero the protagonist is maybe a murderer or an assassin that
certainly doesn't mean that the the author of the book is advocating murder or
assassin as a past time, or assassination is a past time. Okay, good. I've only
got one more major question, and that would involve, oh, let's say, works in
progress, books coming out in the near future. Could you give me a little
statement on that? Yeah, about halfway through the next book, it's different
from the others, but they're all different from each other. I don't think any of
them have variations on the same theme. I mean, we've had one on intelligence
computers and one on time travel and one on aliens and so forth, and this one is
on... We haven't had an alternate universe story yet, so that's what this one
is, and it gets mixed up with World War II. Most of it takes place between the
beginning of 1939 and the end of 1942. And the characters include Franklin
Roosevelt, Albert Einstein, Winston Churchill, Enrico Fermi, Edward Teller, a
whole list of names like that.
Oh, is it the kind of thing we ought to talk too much about in advance? Probably
not, I guess. Let's just say that the
official version has it that the Manhattan Project dealt with developing the
fission bomb and Einstein's ladder years were spent wrestling with an unsolved
problem in unified field theory. Well, both those stories are true as far as
they went, as far as they go. However, there was a little more to it than that,
which is what this book goes into. Okay, good. I don't suppose it has any title
yet, then? No, it doesn't. No, the titles are always the last thing I put on the
book. I just have a working label in the meantime that I simply use to refer to
the book, and at the moment it's just a computer file name. Okay. We had a very
good interview with you before, so really as short as this is, that will be
sufficient. Is there anything else you'd like to add or bring up or have put in
the book or anything like that? No, nothing that comes readily to mind, but if
he finds you have further questions, feel free to give me a call. Okay, that's
good. Listen, we are regular attendees at the Aggie Con, which we understand
you're going to be at next year. Yep, that's how they tell me. So we will be
there to meet you finally. I look forward to that. Yeah, we'll look forward to
it. And listen, of course, we'll send you a copy of this book when it's
published. It's going to be probably at least a year. Okay, well, that's what I
expect. I know these things don't happen overnight. Yeah, and later on, when we
get the manuscript transcribed, of course, we're having typists transcribe the
interviews. And when you get everything ready, introductions, written, and so
forth, we'll maybe get back in touch with you and see if you have an extra
picture. Oh, you did already send it, didn't you? I haven't sent it yet. Oh,
that's right, okay. Yeah, so when we're... I've been down for the last two
weeks. I've only just got back, so... Yeah. Well, yeah, in the future, when we
need it, we'll go ahead and send you a stamped envelope or something. Okay. If
you wouldn't be a bother, you could send us one. I'd appreciate that. Yeah. I'll
get a photograph off to you today or tomorrow. Okay, then thank you, Mr. Hooker.
We sure appreciate your time. Okay, appreciate your interest. Okay, take care.
Thank you. Bye. Bye now.